---
layout: tindallgram
date: Jul 27 1967
from: FM/Deputy Chief
serial: 67-FM-T-45
subject: Spacecraft computer program flow chart status
---
1. Just a note to you cats who are interested in flow charts for the
spacecraft computer programs. MIT has had a small group headed by John
Venize who have done what appears to be an excellent job of
establishing standards to be followed in the development of flow
charts. A group of SDC people have been given the job of taking the
program listings and rough flow charts from the programmers and
turning those into the final product. We were given a schedule
defining when various portions of the Sundisk earth orbital command
module computer programs will be completed. It should be finished no
later than November 17. Substantial portions will be finished sooner
than that, of course, available for distribution. It has been our goal
to do those processors of most immediate interest first. Anyone
interested in the actual schedule should get in touch with Jack
Williams of the Flight Software Branch.

2. I really think we've got this thing moving well now (finally!) and
will be interested in your comments. It was our intention to set up
some system of discrepancy reporting in which we will encourage you to
participate. The intent is to inform MIT people of differences between
the program listing and the flow charts and the GSOP's such that they
may be corrected. This should also provide an incentive for the
programmers to thoroughly check the flow charts before release, since
we are requiring that they sign off on them as being responsible for
their accuracy. Naturally, we intend to execute any programmer whose
flow charts contain a significant number of errors.
